[MUSIC]
In this video,
we're taking on ladders as a challenge.
We're going to have our player climbing up
ladders and climbing back down ladders.
And as the player climbs,
transition into his climbing,
his [SOUND] climbing animations take.
You can see him there,
wiggling his little hands.
Well, I have a couple of bugs that
we'll solve in the next video, but for
now we'll be climbing up and down ladders.
Let's jump in and get started.
Against this lecture,
you will see one file to download,
which is the ladder sprite.
Go ahead and download that,
drag that into your project.
You should see SPA_ladder, our nice little
ladder sprite there we'll be using.
So with that ladder and with the knowledge
you have of how to have your character
move left and right, how to check for
the collision based on a layer.
If we're standing on the ground,
then we know how to jump.
So, with the knowledge of those things
we've been doing the last few lectures and
with your new ladder sprite,
you have everything you need to
take on today's mega challenge.
The mega challenge is to
implement ladder climbing.
So, remember, as you're going through
this process set up your tilemap first.
Drag your ladder into the tilemap,
the tilemap pallet that is.
Make sure that you have
your layers set up.
We have the sorting layer as
well as the collision layer
that you need to set up for that process.
Also, need to create a ClimbLadder method.
Within that method we want to check
that we're touching the ladder.
We also want to apply some
climb velocity to the y-axis,
that which we did with
the run on the x axis.
We had our cross platform input manager
looking in the horizontal axis.
Here we will vertical axis, And
also to set the animator to climbing.
When you are in that climbing mode,
climbing state, so that's some hints and
some information.
This process is probably about 20 or
25 little steps you need through.
If you get stuck at any point in time,
go back and
check the previous lectures where we went
through all of these different processes.
The one thing we might not have touched on
is if you find your player's bumping into
the ladder, then just make sure that you
have your ladder collision set as trigger
and not as collider.
That way you can smoothly move through it.
Okay, so this is a good one give yourself
a good fifteen minutes to half an hour.
Dive in and implement climbing.
You might have a bug or two, that's fine.
We'll fix that either in this video or the
next video, but get your player moving up
and down ladders, and I'll see you back
here when you've had a shot at that.
Okay, welcome back.
How did you go?
I hope you went well, I hope you now have
ladders and you're running up and down.
If there's any gaps in your process or
you're not sure about something,
then follow through.
I'm going to follow with us now.
I'm going to first of all start by
creating a new Tilemap, 2D object Tilemap.
I will call this Tilemap Climbing, and
pretty much name all my things
Climbing at this point in time.
So, we have our new climbing
tile up into there,
I'm going to drag my
ladder into my tile part.
It'll ask me where to save it, I wish to
save it in the tiles folder, save there.
You can see that it's tiny, that's because
our script is not 100 pixels per unit.
We're going to change that to 32 and
hit Apply, and while we're here,
I'm going to make an edit to
the ladder's sprite physics shapes.
You can see there's a weird little bit
of non collision in the middle here.
It shouldn't be a problem, but
I'm going to delete that anyway.
Click on one of these,
these outside gripy things here.
Click and delete, just hit the Delete key
on your keyboard, that should delete them.
Also, going to move these
in a little bit closer.
Unless you're say the guts of the ladder,
the middle of it,
you shouldn't be able to climb on it.
You shouldn't be able to climb it
with a finger tip on the side there.
This is not rock climbing,
this is ladder climbing.
Okay, and make sure you keep them
very low on the bottom here.
Pressing to the bottom and
pressing to the top,
don't accidentally give
yourself a gap in the middle.
That could cause some issues when
we do our composite collider.
Okay, so hit Apply on that,
jump back over in here.
Speaking of composite colliders,
over on to our climbing.
Tile map here,
we need to add a couple of things.
First of all,
we will add a tilemap collider 2D, and
then we will add a composite collider 2D,
as we did before.
The tile map collider 2D we
want to use by composite.
The rigid body 2D we need to make sure
that we set that to static, otherwise,
our ladders will go flying off
down into the nether regions, or
nether regions down into
the bottom of tough.
It's probably not called the nether
region, it's down down below off screen.
There we go, and we're going say
our collider 2D is a trigger.
Next, we should go and
paint some lighters into our tarmac.
Make sure you're clicked on Climbing,
this one gets me from time to time.
Click on your ladder and
the Paint tool, and
then we will put a letter along the side,
and all we can see is our collision.
Why is that?
Well,
we haven't set up our climbing layers yet,
sorry,
our climbing tilemap over
to the title map rendering,
which we will click on Plus here and
call this climbing.
Where's the order for this?
Well, it needs to be between
the background and the player I believe.
So we'll put it just there.
We might need to tweak that later on,
but I think that should be good.
Back over into our climbing Tilemap and
we need to find the Tilemap renderer.
Sorting Layer should be
now defined as Climbing.
Now we can see not just our collision but
also the actual ladder itself.
Fantastico, while we're talking about
layers let's jump up into the top
right while clicked on the Climbing timer.
Select the Layer here.
Add Layer.
We need to add a new.
I'm gonna put this on the User Layer 9.
It doesn't matter so much at the moment
with the way we're doing this, but
I would call it Climbing.
It doesn't matter where we put this,
is what I'm saying.
But we'll put it on Climbing.
And then that should all be good.
That will have clicked into there,
back onto the climbing.
There's a lot of clicking in and
clicking out, up to the layer at the top
here, and define it as climbing.
Now we know that it's our climbing
from a collision perspective, and
it is climbing from a sorting perspective.
We've turned on a static.
We're using by composite,
and we have as a trigger.
So most of those aspects in there
should be pretty good to go now.
So what we need to do is hop
over into our player script.
I have a look what's going on in here.
We need to create ourselves a new method.
Underneath jump,
I will put a climb ladder.
Actually, no,
I'm gonna put this a little bit higher.
I'm gonna put it between run an jump,
just so
I can see things a little bit more easily.
Private void.
ClimbLadder so when I say see things a bit
more easily I mean that I can easily
scroll up and easily scroll down having
to rather than having it all the way down
the bottom here so I put in my brackets
ClimbLadder what do we need to do in here?
Well we need to first of all say are we
touching the ladder so very similar to my.
Statement down below.
We'll do it in the negative.
If I'm not doing something then return.
So if we are not
myCollider2D.IsTouchingLayers very
similar (LayerMask) .GetMask and
then our mask is going to be let's jump
back over into our scene what's our layer
mask up the top here click on Climbing and
it is Climbing so
copy that back over into our script
paste in Climbing okay so if.
Where not touching the climbing layer,
then what is it that we should do?
Well, we should as we've done before,
we should return.
Nice and simple there.
So we're not touching return, don't do
the stuff, but if we are touching then,
let's do some stuff, let's get funky here.
And we take out inspiration from the run
where we have a cross platform input
manager and
we're creating some sort of new velocity
that we're adding to the player.
So we will type this up, rather than
just doing a copying and pasting.
Type it out so we're practicing this flow.
Cross sort of flow control throw equals
cross platform input manager.getaccess.
And what is the access gonna be here?
Again let's jump back over into
our edit project settings input
we can see if we scroll down to
vertical it is called vertical.
Nicely named, look at that.
Spot on.
Vertical is vertical so paste in vertical
and then next line we're going to
say Just saying with run Vector2
we'll call this climbvelocity,
not playervelocity this time.
The other line could possibly
be called runvelocity,
probably a little more accurate,
but it's fine.
We'll leave it there for now,
equals new Vector2, this is going to be
We need to have the X to be the same as it
currently is and then the Y, we're going
to apply our climb velocity so this will
be my rigid body, not my animator again.
We'll be quick on
the order of complete here.
My rigid body dot velocity dot X comma
Control Throw which will be
a value from minus one to plus one
times by our what we call this
climbSpeed we'll call this climbSpeed
we haven't defined climbSpeed yet so let's
scroll up to the top serialize a field.
SerializeField, this will be a type float
just like the other ones we've got her,
climbSpeed, and as all good climbSpeed
should be, it will be initialized at 5.
Why 5?
Don't know, we'll just put it at 5 and
then we can go and
change it in the inspector if need be.
Now back down to ClimbLadder,
what have we got here?
Last step we need in this process is to
say myRigidBody, got it correct this time,
velocity = climbVelocity.
I don't have my typing fingers on today.
There we go, so our climbVelocity
is gonna be myRigidBody.velocity.
What is climbVelocity?
Well it is this new Vector2, which is
the same as you currently are on the x
axis and the controlThrow up or
down, that is.
Times by climb speed and
as i was saying is control
throat on the vertical axis that's why
it's up or down minus 1, 2 plus 1.
So that will all take place
if we are actually touching
the the mask or
touching the layer of climbing.
Let's save that and see what we've missed
before we do that actually I forget,
usually I forget this but this time I
remembered ClimbLadder(), we need to put
our method here in Update() so
every frame we're calling ClimbLadder().
Now we will go into our scene,
click play, see what's happening here.
Run around, yep, jump still works good,
and we can climb the ladder.
Cool.
and he drifts back down again.
So, that's the starting point of being
able to ClimbLadder, conditionally saying,
if you're on a ladder then do that.
Push up and
drift into the air anywhere else.
And we're actually climbing the ladder.
Now that we can move up and
down the ladder, let us go and
change our animation state.
So back over into our script here,
where do we need to put this?
Well, very similar to run, we're gonna
put this underneath the movement.
So we'll say we'll make this as a bool
called player Has vertical speed.
I think the player would be moving up or
down.
And, as with above methf.abs, as in
absolute value, my rigidbody.velocity.
What's his son gonna be?
It's gonna be y once again
greater than mathf.epsilon.
The closer thing we can get
to zero if it's not zero.
And then what is it in our animator?
Well it's myanimator.setball set ball.
We need to know, first of all we
can see here with a signature,
it's the,
what signature are we using here?
String name, so two of two We are using
string name which is going to be climbing,
but we'll go check that and then the bool
value which we will need as true.
In this case playerHasVerticalSpeed,
so it's true or false.
Let's go and double check.
Where do we find that?
In our animations.
No player,
no animator here we can see climbing.
Double click, copy that.
This is our transition ball, so
if this is true you're climbing,
if it's not true you
should not be climbing.
So back to the player script.
Set ball climbing.
And rather than just saying true,
that will turn it on the whole time or
false it will turn it off the whole time.
We're saying whether or
not the player has.
VerticalSpeed is our ball just in here.
Okay, let's hop back over
into playing the game.
We'll see if we can climb up and down.
Climb up.
And got a little runny,
squiggly animation going on there.
So there are a few ways
that you can approach this.
You can have that your player stops on
the ladder and doesn't float back down.
I kinda like the float but
it's not necessary.
We can change that.
You could have the player
can jump through the ladder.
You can have the player
sticks to the ladder.
There's a bunch of things that we can do
to have the ladder behavior how we want.
This is generally the behavior that
I'm happy with in terms of my design.
But feel free to modify it to give it your
own particular flavor of how you want
the player to interact with the ladder.
One thing you have seen is the bug that if
you're holding up It will cause an issue
and the other thing you'll see which
currently I will prefer not to have.
I kind of like it, it's the drifting down
but I'm going to change that as well.
So those things,
I think we've done enough for this video,
in the next video we'll fix that bug and
we'll stop the play at drifting back down.
Now we've got ladder movement and
we are well in our way to having our cool
gameplay so that we can go ahead and put
in some more cool gameplay features and
functionality and start building levels.
So well done On having your player
climb up and down the ladder based upon
the condition of touching the climb
ladder layer or the climbing layer.
And I will see you in the next video.